# rgen
## A Dynamic Rubric Generator

Rgen is a computer program that provides a comprehensive rubric generator for
test and assignment evaluation, combined with a course grade management system.
The implementation is based on my needs as an instructor at Mohawk College. It
integrates data generated by several Mohawk College student data systems,
allows the dynamic construction of rubrics used for evaluation, generates
student grade overview reports with consistent comments, tracks student course
progress, and computes final grades.

1. Rubric Construction:
 * Rubric can be built before evaluation, or modified after comments are applied.
 * Allows modification of rubric comments, or comment scores during grading.
 * Comments can be edited after applied, to clarify, generalize, or fix mistakes.
 * Edited comments and scores are re-applied to all evaluations automatically.

2. Student Record Management:
 * Building student record templates from FastSuite, including e-mail addresses and student IDs.
 * Importing grades generated by MyCanvas, on a per assignment basis.
 * Importing attendance records from online Zoom sessions.
 * Maintains student e-mail list which can be used in any e-mail tool.
 * Generates assignment / test comments and grade summaries.
 * Generates grade reports calculating progress so far.

3. Supports Student Views and Faculty Views:
 * Additional notes are incorporated that are hidden from student views.
 * Provide support for homework and student record annotations.

4. Rgen is written in Python, is simple, portable and extendable.
 * Student data is stored in simple .csv files.
 * Tool supports data import via csv.
 * Interface is text based and menu driven, based on the curses library.
 * Import functions are simple and easily adaptable to other systems.
 * Export is done by cut-and-paste.
 * Grade reports can be printed, e-mailed, or pasted into existing learning management systems (LMS).


## Introduction

Using a Rubric as a tool for grading student papers has a few general purposes
including generating consistent grades, and minimizing the amount of time spent
writing notes on individual papers. Ideally the instructor writes a list of
goals to be met by a student submission, and when grading tests or homework
submissions the goals can be used as a checklist. The core assumption of a
rubric is that most students will make similar mistakes, and its helpful to
write a detailed description of common errors that can be returned as part of
providing feedback and evaluation. The grade sheet, or rubric, can be built
either from a spread sheet or might be a checklist on a sheet of paper that is
returned. Mohawk College's LMS provides a static rubric system modeled on the
classical notion of a 2 dimensional scoring system. There are many good books
on this subject, see for example __Introduction to Rubrics__ by Stevens and
Levi, 2005.  The following example rubric is taken from this book:

![Example Rubric, Stevens 2005](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/Stevens_Example_Rubric_p70.png)

In my teaching of college student's I tried to apply this technique with
spreadsheets. I would grade a few homework answers to get a sense of what students
typically did, and then I would build a checklist for each question. Problems
arose when I tried to apply this early draft of my checklist to the rest of the
answers. I would notice patterns later on that I hadn't imagined, or decide that a grade item that I
believed would be important, hardly ever came up. 

I also ran into some persistent book-keeping problems. For each assignment I
needed to build a rather complicated multi-page spreadsheet that had each
student's name and id associated with each rubric. Individual students would
sometimes make special requests for extensions, or have other issues with their
submission that required some additional attention. Merging this data at the
end of a course was also time consuming. While a spreadsheet could nicely
handle addition, it didn't help much with data management or file management.

## RGEN Student-View, Final Report

The goal is to automatically generate a custom grade sheet for each student.
The following grade sheet was discussed in a recent lecture and used average
scores, and typical comments supplied for students. Questions 2 through 7 were
automatically graded by the LMS and these scores are copied in to RGEN.
Unfortunately myCanvas, the LMS currently in use by Mohawk College has no way
to export test answers, so multiple choice scores must be re-entered. The real
work is saved in the comments for the long answer questions which can be quite
complicated. 

![Example Student Grade Sheet](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/RGEN_1.png)

Scores can be supplied in 3 formats, 2 are shown in the preceding example. A
fixed value score can be entered, this strategy is used in Q1 through Q7. Q8,
Q9 and Q10 deduct a fixed number of points from a total, assigning various
weights, and reasoning to each question.

## RGEN Adding Comments

When grading a question, the instructor may choose to grade a single question
or a small group of questions in sequence for each student. Grading groups of
similar questions helps to keep the details and related issues together. The
following menu is used to add comments to an individual question. The menu
at the top provides a list of comments and their associated scores which
the instructor may select from. The generator modifies the score for the
question as comments are added. In this example the student has made 3
common mistakes, and scores 5/10 total. 

![Example Student Evaluating Q](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/RGEN_2.png)

In the above example the menu presents a list of 14 different possible
comments. Some comments have fixed point values assigned to them, i.e. 
"0 no answer" and "10 Good". Some comments have no point value associated with them.
For this particular test the course had 40 students, and the collection of 14
comments was developed while grading this question. For this question typically
students got between 1 and 4 comments. The question description includes a
reference to a lecture which discussed a similar problem.

## RGEN Modifying a Rubric

The Rubric editor is accessible from the question grading menu.

![Example Editing Rubric](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/RGEN_3.png)

New comments can be added to the rubric, or existing comments can be modified at any point.

If an existing comment's score is modified and many students have had that
comment applied already, the system will recalculate grades. This can lead to
some surprising results. Rgen includes a check for questions that go over the
maximum score for the question or under the minimum and will generate a warning
until scores fit within the prescribed maximum and minimums.

![Example Editing Rubric](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/RGEN_4.png)

Comment's are numbered internally in the order that they are created, but the order of presentation
can be modified. In the above example comments are grouped by type and severity. This makes finding a comment in a list easier. The same order is generated in the student's version which can help with clarity.

## RGEN Searching for Students with particular Comments

A very useful feature provided by rgen is the ability to search for students
who have received a particlar comment. This can help with providing
consistency, or gaining an understanding of who is struggling in the course
with a particular concept. The "Find" option can be run from either the grading
menu or the rubric editor menu. 

![Example Editing Rubric](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/RGEN_5.png)

In the following search result, 4 students did not
answer question #8. This same group also did quite poorly on the test as this
summary screen shows. The first student "Be" asked to be excused from the test.
Question #99 is only shown in the instructor's view and includes the '%' symbol
hinting that this student's grade will need special calculation at some point.
The others struggled with the rest of the test.

![Example Search](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/RGEN_6.png)

## RGEN Other Features

Rgen includes a collection of top level features. It computes a grade in
progress for each student as well as adding up the number of hours the student
has attended Zoom lectures for. Zoom has a feature where it can require that
students log in only with a specific e-mail address. When that address is
restricted to the mohawkcollege.ca domain, Zoom's report can be downloaded and
student's attendance records can be matched via their e-mail addresses. While
Mohawk College does not provide credit for attendance, students sometimes write
in near the end of the course asking what they can do to improve their score.
Knowing at a glance whether they have been making an effort to attend lectures,
or not, can help to understand what kind of a response to provide.

![Top Level Info](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/RGEN_7.png)

Special notes are tracked with symbols in the last column. These notes can be
added to tests. A few symbols are built in with various suggested meanings
including '!', '\*', '%', and '?'. Keeping track of who has made special
requests, has missed an evaluation, or has made a complaint about a grade can
be helpful as the course progresses.

For quizzes, or assessments that are completely evaluated in myCanvas it is
possible to import sets of grades. MyCanvas will export the entire grade sheet
for a course. Rgen can construct an "imported" rubric that simply shows final
single score. Unfortunately myCanvas will not export individual question
scores.

![Data Import](https://github.com/Dave-Gilbert/rgen/blob/main/images/RGEN_8.png)

## Anecdotal Conclusions

Prior to using this rubric generating tool I used a variety of differentwhile it works for my purposes it may seem confusing or quirky. It is fairly
reliable. Each time a modification to either a rubric or a student's grade is made Rgen will save the update to a .csv file on the disk. It always makes a backup of any existing file prior to performing a write. My personal file system is backed up regularly - if you decide to store your student records with Rgen you should take similar precautions.


grading strategies. 20 years ago when I was in graduate school the norm was to
sit down with a printed copy of a student's assignment and write on it with a
pen. I've only worked at the college for a few years. Initially I relearned how
to use a spreadsheet, following the lead of senior staff who would often
provide spreadsheets as a grading template. MyCanvas, the learning management
system provided by the college includes a static Rubric, although these must be
set up in advance of student submissions, and don't seem very flexible to me.

I wrote the initial version of Rgen in a few weeks at the start of the summer
semester and have been using it to evaluate student homework and test
submission. With each homework assignment that I grade I find a few bugs or
limitations. Generally I find that I grade and return things much faster, and
that the supplied comments are far more detailed than I would normally be able
to provide. Students have not complained to me about their grades this term as
much as in other courses, which seems unusual. I'd like to think that the
consistency of the remarks and the detailed explanations contribute to better
and clearer learning outcomes.

I occasionally suffer from wrist strain. It is an occupational hazard in
computing. I've spent time to optimize the menus in rgen to minimize key
strokes. While its still necessary to type in comments the first time, I find
its much easier to navigate simple menus with cursor keys than it is to scroll
through spreadsheet cells. 

The code posted on github is the most recent version that I have been using,
while it works for my purposes it may seem confusing or quirky. It is fairly
reliable. Each time a modification to either a rubric or a student's grade is
made Rgen will save the update to a .csv file on the disk. It always makes a
backup of any existing file prior to performing a write. My personal file
system is backed up regularly - if you decide to store your student records
with Rgen you should take similar precautions.

There are a few ways that the code can generate exceptions, these rough corners
need addressing. If you have any questions you can reach me via gmail at:

dave.wm.gilbert@gmail.com

